# Cash App: Revolutionizing Consumer Finance
### FinTech Case Study by Willy Feid

	
## Overview and Origin	

> Square was founded in February 2009 by Jim McKelvey and Jack Dorsey, who is also the founder and CEO of Twitter. Their primary goal was to enable small businesses to accept card payments, a capability which was inaccessible for many businesses at the time. Their first product, the Square Reader, was a small white card reader that could be connected to a mobile devices audio jack, allowing merchants to easily accept card payments. Now, Square provides more than 30 distinct products and services in their ‘Seller’ ecosystem including point of sale hardware, online selling, payment and inventory management, payroll, and lending. Square’s combination of software, hardware, and financial services creates a cohesive commerce ecosystem for businesses.
>
> In 2013, Square created the Cash App to compete with PayPal’s Venmo in the peer-to-peer payment space. While the Cash App originally only offered the ability to send and receive money, mainly among peers, it now provides users with an array of financial services that allow them to store, receive, spend, and invest their money. Cash App’s portfolio of financial products and services has created a digital alternative to tradition retail banks and this innovation is poised to disrupt the retail banking industry. Furthermore, Cash App has positioned themselves to have a competitive advantage among other fintech providers offering digital-first banking services because of their customer acquisition model (P2P payments) and ability to offer a full ecosystem of products and services.
>
> Square has raised a total of 590.5M in funding over 10 rounds (latest round in July 2016 from a Post-IPO secondary round). Square received 7 rounds of private funding before going public in November 2015. Squares shares began trading on the NYSE for $9 per share on in its November 19, 2015 IPO, with a company valuation of $2.9 billion - raising 243M at IPO. On February 12th, 2021, Square’s stock price hit an all-time high at $216.79. The stock is currently trading around $213 per share on the NYSE.

  
## Business Activities

> The shift to digital banking has become one of the most prominent secular trends in consumer financial services. While there have been accelerated efforts by larger traditional banks (e.g. Chase, Citi, Wells Fargo) to digitalize their services, there has been a rise in ‘neobanks’ and fintech companies creating user-friendly banking services that are entirely digital and eliminate the cost of the physical banking infrastructure while re-inventing the customer experience. Cash App and other digital banking services are addressing some of the shortcomings of traditional banks. According to a survey conducted by Finder, 57 percent of Americans prefer to open bank accounts online. While major U.S. banks like Chase and Bank of America are mostly meeting this demand with their large investments in their mobile app capabilities, many smaller banks and credit unions (which still control roughly 50 percent of the deposits in the U.S.) do not have the resources to digitalize all of their capabilities. Secondly, ‘neobanks’ are able to make basic banking services more affordable by leveraging their lower costs (e.g. no physical locations). For example, an estimated $34 billion was paid in overdraft fees last year. Cash App, and most other digital banks or ‘neobanks’, feature no overdraft fees, account minimums, or account maintenance fees. Finally, another reason why there has been a secular shift to digital banking is because neobanks are able to provide new value-adding financial services that are not typically offered by traditional banks. These additional services include advanced budgeting tools using AI and machine learning, methods for building credit, and mechanisms that help customers save. In addition, some of these rising companies (Cash App, Robinhood) are able to offer fractional investing options, which expands access to investing to many more people (according to a Fed survey, 40 percent of people in the U.S. have less than $400 in available savings). With more effective digital capabilities, affordable services, and new and innovative offerings, neobanks and digital wallets are reshaping the way way people use banking and financial services.
>
> While Cash App has broad appeal in the U.S. as a digital alternative to traditional retail banks, their primary target customers are “digital natives” (currently <35 years old), lower income, and are under-banked or bank with a smaller local or regional bank who can only offer limited digital banking services. According to ARK Invest research on customer acquisition costs, a traditional financial institution pays roughly $1000 to acquire a new checking account customer whereas Cash App and Venmo have an estimated $20 CAC (customer acquisition cost). Lower cost structures and viral marketing strategies are factors, but the main driver in Cash App’s user acquisition is through the network effects of their free peer to peer payments. This feature is often used amongst friends to split payments when going out to dinner, sharing cab rides, or splitting utilities bill with a roommate. There is a convenience and also some social pressure to download the app in order to split tabs. Mobile peer-to-peer payments are penetrating different age groups in the US in half the time that social media did 10 years ago, according to ARK Invest. For P2P payment applications, like social media, the utility of the networks increases at an exponential rate as more people join the network. This network effect, along with new product offerings like the Cash Card, has led to Cash Apps explosive growth. Square reported 1M active users on the Cash App in 2015, one year after launching. By the end of 2019, the number of Cash App users was at 24M, reflecting average annual growth of about 90 percent. 
>
> While many users are first acquired through the peer-to-peer payment network, Cash App has many other offerings for its customers. Users can draw money from a bank account into their Cash App account or, since Cash App accounts have routing and account numbers, users are able to deposit funds directly from their paycheck. These funds can be spent anywhere that accepts cards, used to send to another person using the app, withdrawn from an ATM using the Cash Card, used to buy bitcoin (which can be stored on the app, or sent to an external wallet) or invested into stocks and ETFs. These funds can also be transferred to another bank account instantly for a 1.5% fee or for free in 1-3 days.  In Q1 2020, Cash App launched cross-border payments between the US and UK, allowing customers to transfer funds internationally between these two countries, with no fees using real-time exchange rates. In addition, Square recently acquired Credit Karma Tax, which adds a tax filing product for Cash app’s users, which is mobile-first, and allows them to file their taxes for free. In 2017, Cash App released the Cash Card - a debit card linked to their Cash App balance and offers discounts and rewards through the Cash Boost program (these are funded either by Square or their partners, depending on the agreement). This array of products and services conveniently aggregated in one user-friendly app, makes them an appealing alternative to a traditional bank, particularly for young and/or underbanked people, or those banking at a small or local bank which cannot offer digital services. While Cash App has been primarily targeting the ‘digital native’ cohort (people under 35), their user base tends to be reasonably affluent according to a 2019 Consumer Survey Report.

## Landscape:

> Cash App competes with other companies in the peer-to-peer payments, debit cards, credit card rewards, stock trading, and bitcoin spaces. Like Cash App, digital banks like Monzo, Chime and N26 make banking services more affordable, fully digital, and with low cost structures can offer attractive rewards. However, Cash Apps user acquisition model leveraging the network effects of its P2P payment service gives them a competitive advantage in the digital banking sector.  Therefore, Cash Apps most formidable competitor is PayPal and Venmo. While Venmo is currently the most popular P2P payment application, Venmo’s user growth has decelerated, falling from more than 80 percent to less than 10 percent on a year-over-year basis from 2016-2019. At the same time, Cash App saw explosive growth in users as they rolled out the Cash Card, bitcoin trading, direct deposit features, Boost rewards, and fractionalized stock trading.
>
> In the mobile stock trading space, designed for retail investors, Cash Apps most formidable competitor is Robinhood, which also features fractionalized, no-fee, trading on stocks and ETFs, and also gives users the ability to trade bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies. According to a recent survey by Mizuho Financial Group, Cash App picked up the majority of users who left Robinhood’s platform after the company received backlash from its customers when they halted trading on seven stocks, most notably GME and AMC, on Jan. 28th, 2021 following a retail trading frenzy that pushed these stocks to astronomical highs. The Mizuho survey indicated the close to 40 percent of Robinhood users in the survey who indicated they were leaving the Robinhood platform indicated that they began using the Cash App as their alternative.  Still, Cash App lags behind Robinhood in fractional investing services. During Q120, Robinhood reported 10 million users and generated $100 million in revenue. While Cash App has more users, their customers do not seem to be actively using the investing feature as much, and they have not been able to generate significant profit from this feature. Robinhood also competes with Cash App in the bitcoin space. While Robinhood lists other cryptocurrencies to trade, users can only buy and sell these cryptos. Cash App, on the other hand, actually creates a bitcoin wallet for users - allowing them to not only buy and sell, but to send and receive bitcoin.

## Results:

> Cash App has the ability to generate more revenue than Venmo or other neobanks with their seven different revenue streams. In December 2020, Cash App had more than 36M monthly active customers, up 50 percent from last year. Cash App customers also increased their usage of the platform beyond P2P transactions in this time (Cash Card, Cash Boost, Bitcoin). This increased user activity on the Cash App allows the company to take advantage of other revenue streams. These revenue streams can be grouped into two main categories - sending and spending. Square indicated that in 2019, 70 percent of Cash Apps revenue (excluding bitcoin) was from sending services, mainly generated from Instant Deposit - a feature that allows users to transfer money from their Cash App account instantly for a 1.5% fee. With the ultimate goal to become the main bank account for users (thanks to direct deposit capabilities), the revenue generated from Instant Deposits should decrease over time as users become less likely to have an outside checking account. However, if this trend occurs then Cash App will see more revenue coming in from its other services (many of which have not been monetized in order to attract user engagement). Other forms of sending revenue include fees on P2P transfers via credit card (3%) and consumer to business transfers (2.75%). ‘Spending’ revenue accounted for the remaining 30 percent of Cash Apps 2019 gross revenue through Cash Card debit interchange fees, interest income on customer funds, and ATM withdrawal fees. By end of Q3 2019, Cash App contributed roughly 12.5 percent to Squares overall revenue. By the end of 2020, Square reported that Cash App had more than 36 million monthly active users and generated $1.23 billion in gross profits, representing nearly half of the company’s gross profits. In just the last quarter of 2020, Cash App generated $377 million in gross profit, an increase of over 160 percent year-over-year. This dramatic swing to profitability was driven not only by user acquisition, but by increasing engagement and monetization per customer.
>
> While Cash App has many competitors given their differentiated product suite, Cash Apps strongest value proposition comes from their ability to acquire new users from the network effects of peer-to-peer payments. Therefore, Cash Apps strongest competitor is PayPal’s Venmo. PayPal reported Q3 2020 having 65 million users (does not specify how active these users are). While Cash App has less users on their platform, they have been able to generate $1.23 billion in gross profit in 2020 through their various revenue streams, while Venmo has yet to reach profitability and its only sources of revenue come from Instant Deposit and Interchange fees from the Venmo Debit Card.

## Recommendations: 
	
> Cash Apps ability to generate profit, along with additional revenue streams from Squares seller business, allows the company to invest more into the Cash App in order to expand their product offering further, and strengthen existing ones. Some natural avenues for Cash App to expand its services in the future are consumer credit products and bill payments. Square already offers Square Capital in their Seller ecosystem which allows Square sellers to borrow money in a straightforward and very fast way. By using the sellers’ transactions data, Square is able to assess risk and eliminate the need for lengthly loan applications. These businesses generally receive their funds the next day after being approved, and loan repayment happens automatically through a fixed percentage of every card transaction. This innovation in credit products can be leveraged to the consumer side. Cash App can deliver consumer credit products to their users and use the customers’ Cash App to access risk and structure repayment process in an innovative way (e.g. take a certain percentage from each paycheck). Similarly, through partnerships, Cash App can offer a form of credit card to consumers that could leverage on existing features like the Boost rewards program.
>
> Bill payment is another area that Cash App can take advantage off, and where a lot of consumers still reply on traditional banks for). By consolidating users outstanding bills on the mobile app, and provide flexibility with payment (pay with bitcoin, Boost rewards, or interest free installments) Cash App can further reduce consumers reliance on traditional retail banking services. 
>
> Square is also in a unique position because they provide services to millions of merchants in the Seller ecosystem, and millions of consumers in the Cash App ecosystem. This gives them an opportunity to provide value to both Cash App users and Square sellers when they transact together. One example would be to cut-out the intermediary, in this case Visa, when a Cash Card is used at a Square register - the processing fee that would have gone to Visa can be redistributed to both consumer and merchant. This would incentivize businesses to use Square point of sale systems and consumers to use the Cash Card, and would allow for these network effects to take place. This synergy makes even more sense if they issue a Cash App credit card in partnership with Visa where the fees are much higher.
>
> Cash App will continue to grow and expand services like international remittances, cryptocurrency trading, and consumer credit products - making the traditional bank more obsolete and outperforming other fintech providers in the space because of their ability to offer the full range of consumer banking and investing services in one, easy-to-use application. However, if Cash App wants to push the boundaries of innovation in this sector, they could enter into the tokenization of assets. While Cash App gives its users the ability to invest in stocks, ETFs, and bitcoin, a tokenization platform would allow users to fractionally invest in other assets like real-estate or art. While these assets are often very illiquid and have a high barrier to entry, tokenization makes these investments more accessible and gives them greater liquidity.
>
> Companies like Tokeny are leading the the way in the asset token, or security token space. It will likely be these innovative companies that would be using smart-contract platforms like Ethereum or Cardano to issue securities tokens on these assets. However, by integrating with a smart-contract blockchain, Cash App can become a market place for these types of assets that are often out of reach for most Americans. Imagine, users would not only be able to own stocks, ETFs, bitcoin, but they would be able to add tokens representing small ownership of a Jackson Pollock painting or a new apartment complex in Miami, all in one portfolio on the Cash App, with a fraction of the investment that it would otherwise take to get exposure to these assets. When these security tokens are issued on the blockchain, Cash App can facilitate the a marketplace for these tokens, in the same way it does from bitcoin. However, this would likely mean that Cash App would have to make an initial purchase of certain securities tokens that it would like to offer in order to create the initial market place. This is unlikely given risk exposure to the company, but what is more feasible would be to offer a digital wallet to store these tokens and potentially trade them with other Cash App users. Tokeny is the leader in tokenization and issuance platform, and they use the Etherium and Tezos blockchains to create initial security token offerings. While most security tokens are not currently being traded due to regulation issues, if a company like Tokeny were to issue a security asset using the Etherium blockchain, then that token would effectively become an ERC20 token. Therefore, if Cash App is able to offer users Etherium wallets, they can use those same public and private keys to receive these security tokens. So, even if customers purchased tokens of a certain asset on another platform, they would be able to send these tokens to their Etherium wallet on their Cash App. Users could then transact with these tokens, or trade them amoung other Cash App users. Cash App could also partner with or acquire a security token market place, like tZERO (which currently offers securities tokens of private companies and broker dealers), to allow users to invest in these assets directly.
>
> Cash App already offers enough financial products and services to completely replace the need for a traditional bank for many consumers. With their powerful and effective user acquisition model, their path to expand existing services like international remittances, and their ability to create new services like credit features, Cash App is in a position to replace traditional banking for ‘digital natives’ or those currently using small or local banks. In addition, Cash App has the ability to further monetize it’s existing services and will outperform other neobanks due to their customer acquisition through the peer-to-peer networks and their ability to capture multiple revenue streams.

	
## Resources

* Crunchbase: Square Financials (https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/square/company_financials)

* United States Securities and Exchange Commission: “Form 10K: Square, Inc” (December 31, 2020)  (https://www.sec.gov/ix?doc=/Archives/edgar/data/1512673/000151267321000008/sq-20201231.htm#)

* Invesopedia: “What is Square, Inc?” (May 23, 2020)  (https://www.investopedia.com/articles/tech/021017/square.asp#:~:text=Jim%20McKelvey%20and%20Jack%20Dorsey,use%20bitcoin%20in%20the%20technology.)

* Moffett Nathanson Research: “Square: The Digital Bank Dream - A Deep Dive into Square’s Cash App” (July 1, 2020)

* ARK Invest: “Big Ideas Report 2021” (https://ark-invest.com/big-ideas-2021/)

* ARK Invest: “Cash App vs. Venmo: A Look Inside America’s Most Popular Consumer Finance Applications” (April 30, 2020)   (https://research.ark-invest.com/hubfs/1_Download_Files_ARK-Invest/White_Papers/ARKinvest_050120_whitepaper_%20Cash%20App%20vs.%20Venmo.pdf?hsCtaTracking=41185d8d-21ac-455a-af53-f586a4d7d290%7C127af989-ffac-4053-b633-fa5cadc276aa)

* Chelsea Wells-Barrett: “Neobank Adoption” (December 8, 2020) (https://www.finder.com/neobank-adoption)

 * Emily Bary: “Square seems to be picking up Cash App users amid Robinhood drama, says analyst” (February 1, 2021)   ( https://www.marketwatch.com/story/square-seems-to-be-picking-up-cash-app-users-amid-robinhood-drama-says-analyst-2021-02-01)

* Square, Inc Q4 2020 Results - Earnings Call Transcript (February 23, 2021)  https://seekingalpha.com/article/4408455-square-inc-s-sq-ceo-jack-dorsey-on-q4-2020-results-earnings-call-transcript

* PayPal Holdings Q3 2020 Results - Earnings Call Transcript (November 3, 2020)  https://seekingalpha.com/article/4384306-paypal-holdings-pypl-ceo-dan-schulman-on-q3-2020-results-earnings-call-transcript

* Security Token Advisors: “Biggest Banks in the World Working on Security Tokens & Blockchain” (December 2, 2020)  https://blog.stomarket.com/biggest-banks-in-the-world-working-on-security-tokens-blockchain-9c25daa2f439

* P. Laurent, T. Chollet, M. Burke, T. Seers: “The tokenization of assets is disrupting the financial industry. Are you ready?”  https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/lu/Documents/financial-services/lu-tokenization-of-assets-disrupting-financial-industry.pdf